Transfer learning involves using a pre-trained model on a specific task and applying its learned knowledge to a different but related task. The basic ideology of the feature is that the features learned by the pre-trained model on a large dataset can be generalized and useful for other tasks, even if the new task has a different dataset. The process typically involves taking a pre-trained model, removing its last layers, and replacing them with new layers. The initial layers of the pre-trained model are fine-tuned with a small learning rate to preserve the learned representations. They help in capturing the general features. The newly added layers are then trained using the new dataset specific to the target task.

Fine-tuning refers to the process of taking a pre-trained model and further training it on a new dataset. Fine-tuning involves training the entire model, including the initial layers. The learning rate used for the initial layers is set to a small value to prevent significant changes. While the later layers make use of a higher learning rate to adapt to the new dataset.

Both transfer learning and fine-tuning are widely used in natural language processing. They offer practical solutions to overcome limitations posed by small datasets and allow for the efficient development of deep learning models with improved performance.For the understanding of Transfer Learning with Fine Tuning on an NLP model, let us consider a BERT model. BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) is a state-of-the-art language representation model developed by Google. It is designed to capture contextual relationships and meanings of words within sentences or documents. There is an explicit train-test split. Fine-tuning the BERT model is a custom task using a small sample of input texts and corresponding labels. The input_texts list contains two examples, and the labels list contains their corresponding labels. This example can help us classify positive and negative commentsPython is a high-level, general-purpose, and very popular programming language. Python programming language (latest Python 3) is being used in web development, Machine Learning applications, along with all cutting-edge technology in Software Industry.

Python language is being used by almost all tech-giant companies like – Google, Amazon, Facebook, Instagram, Dropbox, Uber… etc.Python is currently the most widely used multi-purpose, high-level programming language, which allows programming in Object-Oriented and Procedural paradigms. Python programs generally are smaller than other programming languages like Java. Programmers have to type relatively less and the indentation requirement of the language, makes them readable all the time.Computers possess two remarkable capabilities with respect to images: They can both identify them and generate them anew. Historically, these functions have stood separate, akin to the disparate acts of a chef who is good at creating dishes (generation), and a connoisseur who is good at tasting dishes (recognition).

Yet, one can’t help but wonder: What would it take to orchestrate a harmonious union between these two distinctive capacities? Both chef and connoisseur share a common understanding in the taste of the food. Similarly, a unified vision system requires a deep understanding of the visual world.

Now, researchers in MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) have trained a system to infer the missing parts of an image, a task that requires deep comprehension of the image's content. In successfully filling in the blanks, the system, known as the Masked Generative Encoder (MAGE), achieves two goals at the same time: accurately identifying images and creating new ones with striking resemblance to reality. 

This dual-purpose system enables myriad potential applications, like object identification and classification within images, swift learning from minimal examples, the creation of images under specific conditions like text or class, and enhancing existing images.

Unlike other techniques, MAGE doesn't work with raw pixels. Instead, it converts images into what’s called “semantic tokens,” which are compact, yet abstracted, versions of an image section. Think of these tokens as mini jigsaw puzzle pieces, each representing a 16x16 patch of the original image. Just as words form sentences, these tokens create an abstracted version of an image that can be used for complex processing tasks, while preserving the information in the original image. Such a tokenization step can be trained within a self-supervised framework, allowing it to pre-train on large image datasets without labels. 

Now, the magic begins when MAGE uses “masked token modeling.” It randomly hides some of these tokens, creating an incomplete puzzle, and then trains a neural network to fill in the gaps. This way, it learns to both understand the patterns in an image (image recognition) and generate new ones (image generation).

“One remarkable part of MAGE is its variable masking strategy during pre-training, allowing it to train for either task, image generation or recognition, within the same system,” says Tianhong Li, a PhD student in electrical engineering and computer science at MIT, a CSAIL affiliate, and the lead author on a paper about the research. “MAGE's ability to work in the ‘token space’ rather than ‘pixel space’ results in clear, detailed, and high-quality image generation, as well as semantically rich image representations. This could hopefully pave the way for advanced and integrated computer vision models.” 

Apart from its ability to generate realistic images from scratch, MAGE also allows for conditional image generation. Users can specify certain criteria for the images they want MAGE to generate, and the tool will cook up the appropriate image. It’s also capable of image editing tasks, such as removing elements from an image while maintaining a realistic appearance.

Recognition tasks are another strong suit for MAGE. With its ability to pre-train on large unlabeled datasets, it can classify images using only the learned representations. Moreover, it excels at few-shot learning, achieving impressive results on large image datasets like ImageNet with only a handful of labeled examples.

The validation of MAGE's performance has been impressive. On one hand, it set new records in generating new images, outperforming previous models with a significant improvement. On the other hand, MAGE topped in recognition tasks, achieving an 80.9 percent accuracy in linear probing and a 71.9 percent 10-shot accuracy on ImageNet (this means it correctly identified images in 71.9 percent of cases where it had only 10 labeled examples from each class).

Despite its strengths, the research team acknowledges that MAGE is a work in progress. The process of converting images into tokens inevitably leads to some loss of information. They are keen to explore ways to compress images without losing important details in future work. The team also intends to test MAGE on larger datasets. Future exploration might include training MAGE on larger unlabeled datasets, potentially leading to even better performance. 

“It has been a long dream to achieve image generation and image recognition in one single system. MAGE is a groundbreaking research which successfully harnesses the synergy of these two tasks and achieves the state-of-the-art of them in one single system,” says Huisheng Wang, senior staff software engineer of humans and interactions in the Research and Machine Intelligence division at Google, who was not involved in the work. “This innovative system has wide-ranging applications, and has the potential to inspire many future works in the field of computer vision.” 

Li wrote the paper along with Dina Katabi, the Thuan and Nicole Pham Professor in the MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and a CSAIL principal investigator; Huiwen Chang, a senior research scientist at Google; Shlok Kumar Mishra, a University of Maryland PhD student and Google Research intern; Han Zhang, a senior research scientist at Google; and Dilip Krishnan, a staff research scientist at Google. Computational resources were provided by Google Cloud Platform and the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. The team's research was presented at the 2023 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.Discovering new materials and drugs typically involves a manual, trial-and-error process that can take decades and cost millions of dollars. To streamline this process, scientists often use machine learning to predict molecular properties and narrow down the molecules they need to synthesize and test in the lab.

Researchers from MIT and the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab have developed a new, unified framework that can simultaneously predict molecular properties and generate new molecules much more efficiently than these popular deep-learning approaches.

To teach a machine-learning model to predict a molecule’s biological or mechanical properties, researchers must show it millions of labeled molecular structures — a process known as training. Due to the expense of discovering molecules and the challenges of hand-labeling millions of structures, large training datasets are often hard to come by, which limits the effectiveness of machine-learning approaches.

By contrast, the system created by the MIT researchers can effectively predict molecular properties using only a small amount of data. Their system has an underlying understanding of the rules that dictate how building blocks combine to produce valid molecules. These rules capture the similarities between molecular structures, which helps the system generate new molecules and predict their properties in a data-efficient manner.

This method outperformed other machine-learning approaches on both small and large datasets, and was able to accurately predict molecular properties and generate viable molecules when given a dataset with fewer than 100 samples.

“Our goal with this project is to use some data-driven methods to speed up the discovery of new molecules, so you can train a model to do the prediction without all of these cost-heavy experiments,” says lead author Minghao Guo, a computer science and electrical engineering (EECS) graduate student.

Guo’s co-authors include MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab research staff members Veronika Thost, Payel Das, and Jie Chen; recent MIT graduates Samuel Song ’23 and Adithya Balachandran ’23; and senior author Wojciech Matusik, a professor of electrical engineering and computer science and a member of the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, who leads the Computational Design and Fabrication Group within the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). The research will be presented at the International Conference for Machine Learning.

Learning the language of molecules

To achieve the best results with machine-learning models, scientists need training datasets with millions of molecules that have similar properties to those they hope to discover. In reality, these domain-specific datasets are usually very small. So, researchers use models that have been pretrained on large datasets of general molecules, which they apply to a much smaller, targeted dataset. However, because these models haven’t acquired much domain-specific knowledge, they tend to perform poorly.

The MIT team took a different approach. They created a machine-learning system that automatically learns the “language” of molecules — what is known as a molecular grammar — using only a small, domain-specific dataset. It uses this grammar to construct viable molecules and predict their properties.

In language theory, one generates words, sentences, or paragraphs based on a set of grammar rules. You can think of a molecular grammar the same way. It is a set of production rules that dictate how to generate molecules or polymers by combining atoms and substructures.

Just like a language grammar, which can generate a plethora of sentences using the same rules, one molecular grammar can represent a vast number of molecules. Molecules with similar structures use the same grammar production rules, and the system learns to understand these similarities.

Since structurally similar molecules often have similar properties, the system uses its underlying knowledge of molecular similarity to predict properties of new molecules more efficiently. 

“Once we have this grammar as a representation for all the different molecules, we can use it to boost the process of property prediction,” Guo says.

The system learns the production rules for a molecular grammar using reinforcement learning — a trial-and-error process where the model is rewarded for behavior that gets it closer to achieving a goal.

But because there could be billions of ways to combine atoms and substructures, the process to learn grammar production rules would be too computationally expensive for anything but the tiniest dataset.

The researchers decoupled the molecular grammar into two parts. The first part, called a metagrammar, is a general, widely applicable grammar they design manually and give the system at the outset. Then it only needs to learn a much smaller, molecule-specific grammar from the domain dataset. This hierarchical approach speeds up the learning process.

Big results, small datasets

In experiments, the researchers’ new system simultaneously generated viable molecules and polymers, and predicted their properties more accurately than several popular machine-learning approaches, even when the domain-specific datasets had only a few hundred samples. Some other methods also required a costly pretraining step that the new system avoids.

The technique was especially effective at predicting physical properties of polymers, such as the glass transition temperature, which is the temperature required for a material to transition from solid to liquid. Obtaining this information manually is often extremely costly because the experiments require extremely high temperatures and pressures.

To push their approach further, the researchers cut one training set down by more than half — to just 94 samples. Their model still achieved results that were on par with methods trained using the entire dataset.

“This grammar-based representation is very powerful. And because the grammar itself is a very general representation, it can be deployed to different kinds of graph-form data. We are trying to identify other applications beyond chemistry or material science,” Guo says.

In the future, they also want to extend their current molecular grammar to include the 3D geometry of molecules and polymers, which is key to understanding the interactions between polymer chains. They are also developing an interface that would show a user the learned grammar production rules and solicit feedback to correct rules that may be wrong, boosting the accuracy of the system.Transitioning from air to sea, Michael Benjamin, principal research scientist in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, spoke about his work on robotic marine vehicles to explore and monitor the ocean and coastal marine environments. “Robotic platforms as remote sensors have the ability to sense in places that are too dangerous, boring, or costly for crewed vessels,” explained Benjamin. At the MIT Marine Autonomy Lab, researchers are designing underwater surface robots, autonomous sailing vessels, and an amphibious surf zone robot.

Sensing is a huge part of marine robotics, said Benjamin. “Without sensors, robots wouldn’t be able to know where they are, they couldn’t avoid hidden things, they couldn’t collect information.”

Fadel Adib, associate professor​ in the Program in Media Arts & Sciences and the Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science (EECS), is also working on sensing underwater. “Battery life of underwater sensors is extremely limited,” explained Adib. “It is very difficult to recharge the battery of an ocean sensor once it’s been deployed.”

His research group built an underwater sensor that reflects acoustic signals rather than needing to generate its own, requiring much less power. They also developed a battery-free, wireless underwater camera that can capture images continuously and over a long period of time. Adib spoke about potential applications for underwater ambient sensing — climate studies, discovery of new ocean species, monitoring aquaculture farms to support food security, and even beyond the ocean, in outer space. “As you can imagine, it’s even more difficult to replace a sensor’s battery once you’ve shipped it on a space mission,” he said.

Originally working in the underwater sensing world, James Kinsey, CEO of Humatics, is applying his knowledge of ocean sensors to two different markets: public transit and automotive manufacturing. “All of that sensor data in the ocean — the value is when you can geolocate it,” explained Kinsey. “The more precisely and accurately you know that, you can begin to paint that 3D space.” Kinsey spoke about automating vehicle assembly lines with millimeter precision, allowing for the use of robotic arms. For subway trains, he highlighted the benefits of sensing systems to better know a train’s position, as well as to improve rider and worker safety by increasing situational awareness. “Precise positioning transforms the world,” he said.

At the intersection of electrical engineering, communications, and imaging, EECS Associate Professor Ruonan Han introduced his research on sensing through semiconductor chips that operate at terahertz frequencies. Using these terahertz chips, Han’s research group has demonstrated high-angular-resolution 3D imaging without mechanical scanning. They’re working on electronic nodes for gas sensing, precision timing, and miniaturizing tags and sensors.

In two Q&A panels led by Anthony, the presenters discussed how sensing technologies interface with the world, highlighting challenges in hardware design, manufacturing, packaging, reducing cost, and producing at scale. On the topic of data visualization, they agreed on a need for hardware and software technologies to interact with and assimilate data in faster, more immersive ways.

Ambient Sensing was broadcast live from the MIT.nano Immersion Lab. This unique research space, located on the third floor of MIT.nano, provides an environment to connect the physical to the digital — visualizing data, prototyping advanced tools for augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR), and developing new software and hardware concepts for immersive experiences.

To showcase current work being done in the Immersion Lab, retired MIT fencing coach Robert Hupp joined Anthony and research scientist Praneeth Namburi for a live demonstration of immersive athlete-training technology. Using wireless sensors on the fencing épée paired with OptiTrack motion-capture sensors along the room’s perimeter, a novice fencer wearing a motion-capture suit and an AR headset faced a virtual opponent while Namburi tracked the fencer’s stance on a computer. Hupp was able to show the fencer how to improve his movements with this real-time data.

“This event showcased the capabilities of the Immersion Lab, and the work being done on sensing — including sensors, data analytics, and data visualization — across MIT,” says Anthony. “Many of our speakers talked about collaboration and the importance of bringing multiple fields together to advance ambient sensing and data collection to solve societal challenges. I look forward to welcome more academic and industry researchers into the Immersion Lab to support their work with our advanced hardware and software technologies.”computer science articles for studentscomputer science engineering bookscomputer science engineering syllabusnatural language processing examplesWe don’t regularly think about the intricacies of our own languages. It’s an intuitive behavior used to convey information and meaning with semantic cues such as words, signs, or images. It’s been said that language is easier to learn and comes more naturally in adolescence because it’s a repeatable, trained behavior—much like walking. And language doesn’t follow a strict set of rules, with so many exceptions like “I before E except after C.” What comes naturally to humans, however, is exceedingly difficult for computers with the amount of unstructured data, lack of formal rules, and absence of real-world context or intent. That’s why machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) are gaining attention and momentum, with greater human dependency on computing systems to communicate and perform tasks. And as AI and augmented analytics get more sophisticated, so will Natural Language Processing (NLP). While the terms AI and NLP might conjure images of futuristic robots, there are already basic examples of NLP at work in our daily lives. Here are a few prominent examples.Email filters are one of the most basic and initial applications of NLP online. It started out with spam filters, uncovering certain words or phrases that signal a spam message. But filtering has upgraded, just like early adaptations of NLP. One of the more prevalent, newer applications of NLP is found in Gmail's email classification. The system recognizes if emails belong in one of three categories (primary, social, or promotions) based on their contents. For all Gmail users, this keeps your inbox to a manageable size with important, relevant emails you wish to review and respond to quickly.Email filters are one of the most basic and initial applications of NLP online. It started out with spam filters, uncovering certain words or phrases that signal a spam message. But filtering has upgraded, just like early adaptations of NLP. One of the more prevalent, newer applications of NLP is found in Gmail's email classification. The system recognizes if emails belong in one of three categories (primary, social, or promotions) based on their contents. For all Gmail users, this keeps your inbox to a manageable size with important, relevant emails you wish to review and respond to quickly.Smart assistants like Apple’s Siri and Amazon’s Alexa recognize patterns in speech thanks to voice recognition, then infer meaning and provide a useful response. We’ve become used to the fact that we can say “Hey Siri,” ask a question, and she understands what we said and responds with relevant answers based on context. And we’re getting used to seeing Siri or Alexa pop up throughout our home and daily life as we have conversations with them through items like the thermostat, light switches, car, and more. We now expect assistants like Alexa and Siri to understand contextual clues as they improve our lives and make certain activities easier like ordering items, and even appreciate when they respond humorously or answer questions about themselves. Our interactions will grow more personal as these assistants get to know more about us. As a New York Times article “Why We May Soon Be Living in Alexa’s World,” explained: “Something bigger is afoot. Alexa has the best shot of becoming the third great consumer computing platform of this decade.”Search engines use NLP to surface relevant results based on similar search behaviors or user intent so the average person finds what they need without being a search-term wizard. For example, Google not only predicts what popular searches may apply to your query as you start typing, but it looks at the whole picture and recognizes what you’re trying to say rather than the exact search words. Someone could put a flight number in Google and get the flight status, type a ticker symbol and receive stock information, or a calculator might come up when inputting a math equation. These are some variations you may see when completing a search as NLP in search associates the ambiguous query to a relative entity and provides useful results.Things like autocorrect, autocomplete, and predictive text are so commonplace on our smartphones that we take them for granted. Autocomplete and predictive text are similar to search engines in that they predict things to say based on what you type, finishing the word or suggesting a relevant one. And autocorrect will sometimes even change words so that the overall message makes more sense. They also learn from you. Predictive text will customize itself to your personal language quirks the longer you use it. This makes for fun experiments where individuals will share entire sentences made up entirely of predictive text on their phones. The results are surprisingly personal and enlightening; they’ve even been highlighted by several media outlets.One of the tell-tale signs of cheating on your Spanish homework is that grammatically, it’s a mess. Many languages don’t allow for straight translation and have different orders for sentence structure, which translation services used to overlook. But, they’ve come a long way. With NLP, online translators can translate languages more accurately and present grammatically-correct results. This is infinitely helpful when trying to communicate with someone in another language. Not only that, but when translating from another language to your own, tools now recognize the language based on inputted text and translate it.Natural language capabilities are being integrated into data analysis workflows as more BI vendors offer a natural language interface to data visualizations. One example is smarter visual encodings, offering up the best visualization for the right task based on the semantics of the data. This opens up more opportunities for people to explore their data using natural language statements or question fragments made up of several keywords that can be interpreted and assigned a meaning. Applying language to investigate data not only enhances the level of accessibility, but lowers the barrier to analytics across organizations, beyond the expected community of analysts and software developers. To learn more about how natural language can help you better visualize and explore your data, check out this webinar.Text analytics converts unstructured text data into meaningful data for analysis using different linguistic, statistical, and machine learning techniques. While sentiment analysis sounds daunting to brands--especially if they have a large customer base--a tool using NLP will typically scour customer interactions, such as social media comments or reviews, or even brand name mentions to see what’s being said. Analysis of these interactions can help brands determine how well a marketing campaign is doing or monitor trending customer issues before they decide how to respond or enhance service for a better customer experience. Additional ways that NLP helps with text analytics are keyword extraction and finding structure or patterns in unstructured text data. There are vast applications of NLP in the digital world and this list will grow as businesses and industries embrace and see its value. While a human touch is important for more intricate communications issues, NLP will improve our lives by managing and automating smaller tasks first and then complex ones with technology innovation.